[Applause]
you have cancer sadly about 40% of us
will hear those three words within our
lifetime and half will not survive this
means that two out of five of your
closest friends and relatives will be
diagnosed with some form of cancer and
one will die beyond the physical
hardships roughly one third of cancer
survivors here in the US will go into
debt from treatment and there at least
two and a half times more likely to
declare bankruptcy than those without
cancer this disease is pervasive it's
emotionally draining and for many
financially destructive but a cancer
diagnosis doesn't have to be a death
sentence finding cancer early closer to
its Genesis is one of the critical
factors to improving treatment options
reducing its emotional impact and
minimizing financial burdens most
importantly finding cancer early which
is one of the primary aims of my
research greatly enhances your odds of
survival if we just look at the case of
breast cancer for example we find that
those who are diagnosed and treated at
stage 1 have a 5-year survival rate of
nearly 100% odds it decreased to just
22% if treated at stage 4 and a similar
trends are found for colorectal and
ovarian cancer now we're all aware that
an early diagnosis that is accurate is
critical for survival the problem is is
that many cancer diagnostic tools are
invasive costly often inaccurate and
they can take an agonizing amount of
time to get the results back still worse
when it comes to some forms of cancer
such as ovarian liver or pancreatic
cancer
good screening methods simply don't
exist meaning that often people wait
until physical symptoms surface which
are themselves already indicators of
late-stage progression like a tornado
strike in an area without an early
warning system there is no alarm to warn
for the danger is already at your
doorstep when your odds of survival are
greatly reduced having the convenience
and accessibility of regular screening
options that are affordable non-invasive
and could provide results much sooner
would provide us with a formidable
weapon in the fight against cancer and
early warning would allow us to get out
ahead of the disease instead of merely
following and it's relentless quake and
this is exactly what I've been doing for
the past three years I've been
developing technologies that could
ultimately aid clinicians with rapid
early stage cancer diagnostics and I've
been fueled by a deep scientific
curiosity and a passion to change these
statistics last year however this fight
became much more personal when my wife
was diagnosed with breast cancer it was
an experience that added a strong and
unexpected emotional dimension to these
efforts I know firsthand how
life-altering treatment can be and I'm
keenly aware of the emotional havoc that
cancer can wreak on a family which in
our case included our two young
daughters because we found it early
during a routine mammogram we were able
to focus primarily on treatment options
for the localized tumor reaffirming to
me how important an early diagnosis is
unlike other forms of cancer mammograms
do offer an early stage screening option
for breast cancer still not everyone has
this done or they may develop breast
cancer before the middle age
recommendation for having a mammogram so
there's still a lot of room for
improvement even for cancers that do
have screening options and of course
considerable benefits for those that
don't
a key challenge then for cancer
researchers is to develop methods that
make regular screening for many types of
cancers much more accessible imagine a
scenario where during a regular checkup
your doctor can take a simple
non-invasive urine sample or other
liquid biopsy and present you with the
results before you even leave the
doctor's office such a technology could
dramatically reduce the number of people
who slip through the net of an early
stage cancer diagnosis now my research
team of engineers and biochemists is
working on exactly this challenge we're
working on ways to frequently activate
an early stage cancer alarm by enabling
regular screenings that would start when
a person is healthy so that action could
be taken to stop cancer the moment it
emerges and before it can progress
beyond its infancy the silver bullet in
this case are tiny vesicles little
escape pods regularly shed by cells
called exosomes exosomes
are important biomarkers that provide an
early warning system for the development
of cancer and because they are
abundantly present in just about every
bodily fluid including blood urine and
saliva
they are extremely attractive for
non-invasive liquid biopsies there's
just one problem an automated system for
rapidly sorting these important
biomarkers is not currently available
we've created a technology that we call
nano dld that is capable of precisely
this automated exosome isolation to aid
rapid cancer diagnostics exosomes are
the newest early warning weapon if you
will to emerge on the liquid biopsy
front and they are really really small
they measure just thirty to a hundred
and fifty nanometers in diameter this is
so tiny that you can fit about a million
of them into a single red blood cell
that's roughly the difference between a
golf ball and a fine-grained piece of
sand once thought to be little bins for
unwanted cellular waste it has been
found that cells actually communicate by
juicing and absorbing these exosomes
which contain surface receptors proteins
and other genetic material collected
from their cell of origin
now when absorbed by a neighboring cell
exosomes release their contents into the
receiving cell and can set in motion
fundamental changes in gene expression
some good and this is where cancer comes
in some bad because they are closed in
the material of the mother cell and
contain a sample of its environment they
provide a genetic snapshot of that self
health and its origin all of these
qualities make exosomes invaluable
messengers that potentially allow
physicians to eavesdrop on your health
at the cellular level to catch cancer
early however you have to frequently
intercept these messages to determine
when cancer-causing troublemakers within
your body decide to start staging a coup
which is why regular screening is so
critical and why we're developing
technologies to make this possible
now while the first exosome based
Diagnostics emerged on the market just
this year they are not yet part of
mainstream health care options in
addition to their recent emergence
another factor that's limiting their
widespread adoption is that currently no
automated exosome isolation system
exists to make regular screening
economically accessible the current gold
standard for exosome isolation includes
ultra centrifugation a process requiring
expensive laboratory equipment a trained
lab tech and about 30 hours of time to
process a sample we've come up with a
different approach for achieving
automated exosome isolation from a
sample such as urine we use a chip based
continuous flow separation technique
called deterministic lateral
displacement and we have done with it
what the semiconductor industry has done
so successfully for the past 50 years we
shrunk the dimensions of this technology
from the micron scale to the true nano
scale so how does it work in a nutshell
a set of tiny pillars separated by
nanoscopic gaps are
arranged in such a way that the system
divides the fluid into streamlines
with the larger cancer-related
nanoparticles being separated through a
process of redirection from the smaller
healthier ones which can in contrast
move around the pillars in a zigzag type
motion in the direction of fluid flow
the net result is a complete separation
of these two particle populations you
can visualize this separation process
similar to traffic on a highway that
separates into two roads with one road
going into a low clearance tunnel under
a mountain and the other Road going
around it here smaller cars can go
through the tunnel while larger trucks
carrying potentially hazardous material
are forced to take the detour route
traffic is effectively separated by size
and contents without impeding its flow
and this is exactly how our system works
on a much much smaller scale the idea
here is that the separation process for
screening could be as simple as
processing a sample of urine blood or
saliva which is a near-term possibility
within the next few years
ultimately it could be used to isolate
and detect target exosomes associated
with the particular type of cancer
sensing and reporting their presence
within minutes this would make rapid
Diagnostics virtually painless broadly
speaking the ability to separate and
enrich biomarkers with nanoscale
precision in an automated way opens the
door to better understanding diseases
such as cancer with applications ranging
from sample preparation to diagnostics
and from drug resistance monitoring to
therapeutics even before my wife's bout
with cancer it was a dream of mine to
facilitate the automation of this
process to make regular screening more
accessible similar to the way Henry Ford
made the automobile accessible to the
general population through development
of the assembly line automation is the
key to accessibility and in the spirit
of the hoover dream a chicken in every
pot and a car in every garage we're
developing a technology that could
ultimately place an early-warning cancer
to
action system in every home this would
allow every man woman and child the
opportunity to be regularly tested while
they're still healthy catching cancer
when it first emerges it is my hope and
dream to help people around the world
avoid the high-cost physical financial
and emotional faced by today's cancer
patients hardships that I'm
well-acquainted with I'm also happy to
report that because we caught my wife's
cancer early her treatment was
successful and she is now thankfully
cancer-free it is an outcome that I
would like to see for everyone with a
cancer diagnosis with the work that my
team has already done on separation of
nano scale biomarkers for rapid early
stage cancer diagnostics I am optimistic
that within the next decade this type of
technology will be available helping
protect our friends our family and
future generations even if they are so
unlucky is to be diagnosed with cancer
that early stage alarm will provide a
strong beacon of hope thank you
[Applause]